1.1 The Diversity of Life

The six kingdoms of life are:
    Archaea, Bacteria, Protista, Fungi, Plantae, and Animalia

We as humans belong to the anamalia kingdom.

1.2 Properties of Life

The five properties shared by all living things are:
    cellular organization, metabolism, homeostasis, growth and reproduction, and heredity.

Complexity, movement, and response to stimulation are not properties that define life, because
many non living items posses varying degrees of these properties. For example, a solar
car is complex, it moves, and in response to sunlight it charges, yet it is not alive.
    

1.3 Organization of Life

The hierarchical levels of the organization of life are:
    Atoms, molecules, macro-molecules, organelles, cells, tissue, organ, organ system,
    organism, species, community, ecosystem.

Levels 1-5 are considered the cellular level, 6-9 the organism level, and 10-13 the population level.

An emergent property results from the way sub structures interact that typically can't be
predicted from the sub-structures alone.

Chemical reactions in a cell arise from molecules, thought emerges from the brain, and 
schools emerge from individuals working together.

1.4 Biological Themes

The five general themes that unify biology as a science are:
    Evolution, the flow of energy, cooperation, structure determines function, and homeostasis.

Energy flows from plants that photosynthesize to creatures that eat plants to creatures
that eat the plant eaters.

Symbiosis is when two unique organisms work to each other's benefit.

Maintaining homeostasis in a complex organism requires lots of signaling between cells.

1.5 How Scientists Think

Deductive reasoning uses a generally accepted set of guidelines to explain specific
observations whereas inductive reasoning relies upon careful examination of specific cases..

In most scientific studies inductive reasoning is practiced.

The steps of the scientific method are:

1.6 Science in Action: A Case Study

Man made chemicals like chlorofluorocarbons deplete ozone creating "hole" over Antarctica.    

Ozone depletion is dangerous to humans because ozone blocks harmful UV rays.

1.7 Stages of a Scientific Investigation

The six stages of a scientific investigation are:
    Observe, form hypothesis, make predictions experiment, experiment, and form conclusions.

1.8 Theory and Certainty

A hypothesis is: an educated guess.

A theory is a hypothesis for which much evidence has been gathered, but like a hypothesis
is still provisional and slave to contrary evidence.

Scientists use the word theory to mean a set of working knowledge for which there is 
great evidence; however, not unchanging in the face of new evidence.

The general public often uses theory to mean a 100% proven fact.

The so-called "scientific method" is the only effective tool we have to learn 
truths about our world.

1.9 Four Theories Unify Biology as a Science

The four theories are: The Cell Theory, The Gene Theory, The Theory of Heredity, and The Theory of Evolution.

2.1 Atoms

Matter is any substance that has mass and occupies space.

An atom consists of neutrons, protons, and electrons.

Mass is the intrinsic mass of matter whereas weight is the mass * the force of gravity acting upon that matter.

The proton determines the chemical behavior of an atom.

Electrons carry energy by jumping between lower and higher shells, thus gaining or losing potential energy.

An electron shell is sort of an energy level, whereas the orbit is a likely place to find electrons. Each
shell contains some number of orbitals.

2.2 Ions and Isotopes

An ion has a number of electrons that is not equal to the number of neutrons whereas an isotope has a number of neutrons
that differ from the number of protons.

Radioactive decay occurs when an isotope loses a neutron.

14C radioisotope dating works because animals eat material containing a specific average ratio of 14C to 12C. Once they
die, they stop consuming this material, and the ratio drops with a predictable half-life. 14C radio isotopic dating 
cant be used for dinosaurs because the half life of 14C degenerates too quickly. Instead 40K is used.

2.3 Molecules

A molecule is a group of atoms held together by energy.

There are ionic, covalant, and hydrogen bonds.

Ionic bonds create a crystal structure because they are not directional and covalent bonds are.

Covalent bonds formed between atoms of similar electronegativity are non-polar and visa versa. Polar bonds
act something like bar magnets.

Hydrogen bonds form weak bonds on their own compared to covalent bonds because they are formed from polar bonds
and only partially share partial charges. Covalent bonds on the other hand share two electrons each.

Van der Valls forces are bonds that only occur when atoms fit like puzzle pieces at just the right distance whereas
normal chemical bonds are much stronger and occur with much less prompting.

Water: Cradle of life

2.4 Hydrogen Bonds Give Water Unique Properties.

Water's general properties include: Heat Storage, Ice Formation, High Heat of Vaporization, Cohesion, and High Polarity.

Ice floats because the hydrogen bonds become harder to break, and the molecules line up in a structured but more spaced out manner.

Sweating cools your body down because it takes a lot of energy for water to evaporate.

Insects can walk on water because of cohesion. Cohesion causes surface tension.

Salt is soluble in water because the partial charges of water molecules are attracted to the charged sodium and chloride ion. 
This is not the case for oils.

2.5 Water Ionizes

pH is the negative log of the hydrogen ion concentration in a solution.

The change in ion concentration indicated by a change of one on the pH scale would be a factor of 10.

An acid is a substance that dissociates in water to increase the concentrations of H+ whereas a base is a 
substance that combines with H+ when dissolved in water.

A buffer maintains pH by taking up or releasing H ions in the solution.

The key buffer in human blood is carbonic acid-bicarbonate.

Chapter Three - Forming Macro-molecules

3.1 Polymers are Built of Monomers

A polymer is built out of monomers.

Organic molecules have a carbon based core.

The four kinds of biological macromolecules are: proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids.

Dehydration synthesis removes a water molecule whereas hydrolysis adds one.

3.2 Proteins

The six functional groups 
of proteins are Enzymes, Transport, Structural(collagen), Structural(keratin), Defensive, and Contractile.

Amino Acid   Amino Acid
  H R          H R
  | |          | |
H-N-C-C--OH  H-N-C-C--OH  p
    | ||         | ||  
    H O          H O


        ||
        VV  

Polypeptide Chain
  H R       H R
  | |       | |
H-N-C-C---N-C-C--OH  p
    | ||    | ||  
    H O     H O

      Water
        O
       / \
       H H

Primary structure is: the sequence of acids of a poly-peptide chain.
Secondary: The Polypeptide chain folds due to hydrogen bonding within itself.
Tertiary: The protein is folded due to polar and non-polar building blocks and external stimuli such as reacting to water.
Quaternary: A protein that is composed of more than one Polypeptide chain.

A chaperon protein works by helping another protein to fold correctly.

A prion is a proteinaceous infectious particle. This is a protein known for causing diseases.

3.3 Nucleic Acids

A nucleotide is composed of a five-carbon sugar, a phosphate group, and an organic nitrogenous base.

The five types of nucleotide are Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, Thymine, and Uracil.

The major differences between DNA and RNA are: RNA is a single Long strand whereas DNA is a Double helix of two strands, 
and RNA contains a sugar ribose but DNA contains a hydroxyl group.

The possible base parings are: AT TA GC CG. The others tend not to occur because they do not form proper hydrogen bonds.
The electron sharing atoms are not aligned.


3.4

A carbohydrate is any molecule that contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in the ratio of 1:2:1.

A monosaccharide has a single sacharon or sweet molecule. An example is glucose.
A disaccharide is two monosaccharides linked together through dehydration. An example is
table sugar.

A polysaccharide is more than two. An example is wheat.






