4.1 Cells
1. State cell theory: Cell theory is the idea that all organisms are composed of cells. 
    Today, the cell theory includes three principles.
    a. All organisms are compsoed of one or more cells, within which the processes of life
        occur.
    b. Cells are the smallest living things. Nothing smaller than a cell is considered alive.
    c. Cells arise only by divisino of a previously existing cell.
2. Explain why cells are small: Most cells are small because larger cells don't function as
    efficiently. One such inifficiency is surface area to volume, and another is distance
    from the nucleas. Because the nucleas acts as a command and control center, larger
    cells communicate more slowly.
3. Recount how we are able to visualize individcual body cells: By increasing resolution
    using microscopes, we are able to visualize individual body cells.

4.2 The Plasma Membrane
1. Explain why a lipid bilayer forms spontaneously: Lipid layers spontaneously form due
    to the polar head and non-polar tails of phospholipids. Phospholipids arrange themselves
    into a plasma membrane following the fluid mosaic model. Essentially, because the 
    phospholipids are partially polar, they arange themselves in water.
2. Describe how proteins are anchored within the plasma membrane: Proteins are anchored 
within the plasma membrane much the same way phospholipids are forced into a plasma membrane.
These proteins have a non-polar helical spiral that is held in place by water's tendency
to avoid contact with non-polar structures.

4.3 Prokaryotic Cells
1. Describe the interior of a prokaryotic cell:
    Prokaryotes have a relatively univorm chytoplasm that is not subdivided by interior 
    membranes into separate compartments.

4.4 Eukaryotic Cells
1. List those organelles unique to eukaryotic cells:
    Mitochondrion, Cytoskeleton, Nucleus, Vesicles.

4.5 The Nucleus: The Cell's Control Center
1. Recount the two functions of the nucleus: The nucleus is the command and control center
    of a cell, and it stores hereditary information.

4.6 The Endomembrane System
1. Describe the functioning of the four principal elements of the endomembrane system: The
    endomembrane system acts as the transportation system, the delivery system, recycling
    centers, and chemical supply.j
    

4.7 Organelles That Contain DNA:
1. fDescribe the internal structure of a mitochondrion: The internal structure of a 
mitocondrion consists of the intermembrane space, cristae, matrix, and the inner and outter 
membranes.

2. Describe the internal structure of a chloroplast: Chloroplasts are larger than mitochondria,
and have more complex organization. Thylakoids, green disk like membranes are
the site of photosynthesis. The thylakoids are then stacked to form 

3. Explain the theory of endosymbiosis and evaluate the evidence supporting it: The theory of
endosymbiosis suggests that eukaryotic cells came about because one prokaryotic cell engulfed
another. Instead of breaking down as food, the engulfed cell remained in tact, but it provided
a symbiotic relationship to the larger cell. There is much support for this theory. For example,
Mitochondria and chloroplasts both contain an inner and outer membrane. In each 
case, it appears that the inner evolved from the engulfed host, and the outer 
evolved from the host cell. 

4.8
1. Describe the protein fibers of the cytoskeleton: There are three different types of protein
fibers of the cytoskeleton: microtubules, microfilaments, and intermediate filaments. The
cytoskeleton is a frameork that supports and anchors other organelles.

2. Explain why somoe scentists think centriales might have arisen by endosymbiosis: Some
scientists tink centrioles might have arisen by endosymbiosis because cetrioles resembles 
spirochete bacteria that has lost it's DNA.

3. Define vacuole: A vacuole is essentially a large storage site for water, sugar, ions and more.

4. Explain how animal cells move from one place to another: Some cells crawl, and some swim with 
flagella and cilia. 

5. Explain how eukaryotic cell transports materials within its cytoplasm: Materials are packaged
in the Golgi complex, and then these packages travel along the endomembrane system or lysomes.

4.9 Outside the Plasma Membrane
1. Compare teh exteriors of animal, fungi, plant, and protist cells:
Plants, fungi, and most protist cells have cell walls. Animal cells do not. Eukaryotic cell walls
are different from bacterial cell walls.

4.10 Diffusion
1. Explain why diffusion occurs down a concentration gradient: Diffusion occurs down a
concentration gradient because the greater the concentration, the less diffusion occurs.
From one side of the membrane to the other, a molecule would want to diffuse given 
the chance from the cells membrane.

2. Define selective permeability: The cell membrane selects for admission certain molecules
and rejects others.

3. Explain why 02 diffusion across a plasma membrane is affected by a cell's oxygen
concentration but not its C02 concentration: Each substance tends to diffuse in 
the directino established by it's own concenttration, not that of anothers.

4. Explain the factors that influence the rate of diffusion: The steepness of the concentration
gradient, the area of the membrane avalable for diffusion, and physical characteristics of the 
cell environment. Basically, the difference between the concentration levels on either side, and
the permiability of the membrane along with actuall physical attributes determine the 
rate of diffusion.

4.11 Facilitated Diffusion
1 Explain why facilitated diffusion saturates, while simple diffusion does not: There are
a limited number of transport proteins, and when the saturation gradient is high enough,
all of these proteins will be in use.

4.12 The Diffusion of Water
1. Define osmosis: The diffusion of water molecules from an area of high concentration to an area
of low concentration is know as osmosis.

2. Contrast hydrostatic pressure and osmotic pressure: Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure of 
the cytoplams pushing against the cell membrane, and osmotic is the pressure pushint in.

3. Discuss the three ways organisms retain balance: Extrusion--a vacuole is used to pump water
out to maintain equilibrium. Isosmotic Solutions--the interior solution is altered to match the
tonic level of the exterior fluids, and Turgor--some cells are hypertonic to cause a pressure
against their cell walls like a baloon.

4.13 Bulk Passage into and out of Cells
1. Define endocytosis: Endocytosis is the process of extending the plasma membrane outward to surround 
a particle, and create a vesicle.



4.13 Bulk Passage into and out of Cells
1. Define endocytosis: Endocytosis is the process of extending the plasma membrane outward to surround 
a particle, and create a vesicle.

4.13 Bulk Passage into and out of Cells
1. Define endocytosis: Endocytosis is the process of extending the plasma membrane outward to surround 
a particle, and create a vesicle.

2. Compare phagocytosis and pinocytosis: Phagocytosis is the intake of particles, wheras pinocytosis 
is the intake of a fluid or solution.

3. Explain why receptor mediated endocytosis is specific: Because receptor proteins only match to
the selected molecule brefore engulfing the molecule.

4.14 Active Transport

1. Define active transport, describing the role of ATP in powering operation of the sodium-potassium pump:
The sodium-potassium pump uses the break down of ATP to power the shape changing of the protein pump to
motivate the removal of sodium, and the attraction of potassium.

5.1 The Flow of Energy in Living Things
1. Differentiate between kinetic and potential energy: Potential energy is stored energy, and 
kindetic energy is energy in motion.

5.2 The Laws of Thermodynamics
1. Defend the proposition that heat is kinetic energy: Heat is kinetic energy becuase
it is particles in motion.

2. State the second law of thermodynamics: The disorder of a closed system is continuously increasing.

3. Define Entropy: Entropy is a measure of the degree of disorder of a system.

5.3 Chemical Reactions
1. Differentiate between endergonic and exergonic chemical reactions: Endergenic reactions require and
absorb energy whereas exorgonic reactions release energy.

2. Define activation energy: Some exorgonic reactions require a certain amount of energy to catalyze
their reactions. This energy is called activation energy.

3. Describe the effect of catalysis on activation energy: The effect of catalysis on activation energy is
to decrease the amount of energy required for activation of the reaction. This also speeds the reaction.

5.4 How Enzymes Work
1. Differentiate between an enzyme's active site and its binding site: The binding site is the site on the 
reactant that binds to the enzyme, and the active site is the site on the enzyme that binds to the reactant.

2. Distinguish between a chemical reaction and a biochemical pathway: A biochemical pathway is a sequnce of
enzymes that catalyze substrates into progressively modified products. A chemical reaction is just a 
simple random reaction.

3. Explain the influence of temperature on an enzyme-catalyzed reaction: Enzymes must operate within a 
optimal temperature rancge otherwise the bonds that hold their peptide chains in the proper position
become too weak. 

5.5 How Cells Regulate Enzymes
1. Distinguish between competitive and non allosteric feedback inhibition: Competitive inhibitors block
the active site of the enzyme, and non-competitive inhibitors simply change the shape of the enzyme such
that it cannot accept the substrate.


5.6 ATP: The Energy Currency of the Cell
1. Explain how the chain of three phosphate groups in ATP stores potential energy: The phopates are 
negatively charged, and when held together in a straight line, they contain potential energy like a 
spring.







